# DRUG RESISTANCE
Task 0
WHO defined drug resistance as “the ability of microorganisms to withstand attack by antimicrobial drugs”, (Pasipanodya, and Gumbo, 2011), and this can lead to a reduction in the effectiveness/efficacy of a drug to cure a specific disease or improve the symptoms in a patient. Drug resistance can be developed against antibiotics, antivirals, or chemotherapeutic agents for cancer treatment (Chen, 2010). Drug resistance is a worldwide healthcare crisis that can also lead to toxicities (Ahmadian et al., 2020).
Drug resistance is generally a complex cellular response, which can be caused by different factors ranging from drug metabolism, and drug at the target site to the drug elimination phase (Gupta and Jhawat, 2017). Patients’ attitudes toward drug use can also contribute to the factors above. Drug resistance can also be either target-specific or target-nonspecific mechanisms. (Chen T., 2010). In target-specific drugs, an alteration in a specific drug target that reduces/inhibits the interaction between the target and drug will lead to drug resistance. For example, mutations in viral genes frequently lead to antiviral drug resistance and loss of expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) can cause tamoxifen resistance in patients with breast cancer. On the other hand, target-nonspecific drug resistance is resistance contributed to by changes in parameters that are not directly relevant to or dependent on the drug target. For example, target cells or organisms might produce higher levels of drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) to degrade the drug or increase its efflux capacity, resulting in decreased bioavailability and reduced drug effectiveness (Chen, 2010). 
Drug resistance has been observed to be one of the major causes of therapeutic problems that severely limit the outcome of different types of cancers such as ovarian cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer etc. Malignant cells rapidly develop resistance to chemotherapeutic agents through various mechanisms, which include; reduced drug uptake due to OATP1B3 overexpression, increased drug efflux due to P-glycoprotein (P-gp) overexpression, triggering of DNA repair processes via ERCC1 upregulation, disruption of apoptotic signaling pathways due to Bcl-2 overexpression, and presence of cancer stem cells (Seth Kwabena Amponsah and Adams, 2022). Likewise, antimicrobial drug resistance (AMR), which is a major form of drug resistance, is a very alarming situation in cancer patients based on the concurrent microbial infections due to immunosuppression observed in patients taking chemotherapy. The microbial infections caused by these drug-resistant microbes usually lead to an increased risk of poorer clinical outcomes in cancer patients, including death.
# References
Pasipanodya, J.G. and Gumbo, T. (2011). A new evolutionary and pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic scenario for rapid emergence of resistance to single and multiple anti-tuberculosis drugs. Current opinion in pharmacology, [online] 11(5), pp.457–463. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coph.2011.07.001.
Chen, T. (2010). Overcoming drug resistance by regulating nuclear receptors. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 62(13), pp.1257–1264. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2010.07.008.
Ahmadian, E., Samiei, M., Hasanzadeh, A., Kavetskyy, T., Jafari, S., Alipour, M., Salatin, S., Rameshrad, M., Sharifi, S., Eftekhari, A. and Hasanzadeh, M. (2020). Monitoring of drug resistance towards reducing the toxicity of pharmaceutical compounds: Past, present and future. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, [online] 186, p.113265. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpba.2020.113265.
Gupta, S. and Jhawat, V. (2017). Quality by design (QbD) approach of pharmacogenomics in drug designing and formulation development for optimization of drug delivery systems. Journal of Controlled Release, 245, pp.15–26. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.11.018.
Seth Kwabena Amponsah and Adams, I. (2022). Drug resistance problems in chemotherapy. Elsevier eBooks, pp.121–141. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-323-90773-6.00024-5.


